# Abstract



A wealth of evidence has shown that the act of memory retrieval can dramatically improve retention of the information that is retrieved. Additionally, selectively retrieving some information can impair or improve retention of other information that was not retrieved. The effects of selective retrieval in educational texts are not well understood. Some studies have shown that selective retrieval improves retention of untested information from the same source text if the source text was cohesive (Chan, 2009), whereas other studies have shown that, even in cohesive texts, selective retrieval can cause impairments of untested information if there is competition at retrieval (Little et al., 2011). Building upon foundational reading comprehension theories that emphasize the importance of situation models (mental models of the situation described by a text; e.g., van Dijk & Kintsch, 1978), we presented an account whereby text characteristics (whether cohesively written or not), retrieval practice target characteristics (well-integrated or not), and reader characteristics (prior knowledge and reading ability) all contribute to the consequences of selective retrieval for unpracticed information. Text and reader characteristics contribute to the reader’s ability to form a coherent mental model of the text, and retrieval practice target characteristics dictate the extent that information is reactivated during retrieval practice. Main ideas of text are more likely to be highly integrated into the situation model of the text, whereas peripheral, supporting ideas, are not, suggesting that retrieval practice of main ideas is most likely to benefit retention of unpracticed information. Here, using cohesive science texts, participants practiced retrieval of main ideas in one group, practiced retrieval of peripheral ideas in a second group, or were excused until the final tests in the control group. On final tests, we predicted that both retrieval practice conditions would enhance retention of previously tested information. Critically, for untested information, we predicted that main idea retrieval practice would lead to retention benefits, whereas peripheral idea retrieval practice would lead to retention impairments, relative to the control condition. Results from two experiments using distinct texts revealed robust effects of retrieval practice for practiced information, but retrieval practice had modest and inconsistent effects for untested information. Individual differences in prior knowledge and reading ability had more robust effects on retention of untested information. We conclude by discussing how our results fit with the situation model account and the implications for educational practices.
